随着老龄化社会的到来，出现行走障碍的患者日益增多，对医疗资源的需求逐渐扩大。下肢康复外骨骼作为康复医疗的一种重要辅助设备，为下肢康复提供了新的方法。外骨骼已然成为当下机器人研究领域一个重要的分支，涌现了形式各异的外骨骼位姿检测方法，亟需一套运动检测系统对下肢康复外骨骼设计有效性进行评估。
我国现代化工业体系的不断完善，如军工，航天，医疗等在特殊环境下工作的材料设备的安全健康性检测已经成为机械工程领域热门的研究方向。设备的实时监测旨在通过对目标设备的正常功能性检测，分析和识别，从而实现对其工作性能和安全状态的评估和检测。为实现这一目标，需结合多学科交叉理论和方法研发新型传感技术，为设备工作状态和性能评估提供先进的监测方法和可靠的数据来源，精准的位移是现代化工业作业的状态评估和性能评价的重要指标。随着计算机视觉技术和图像采集设备的不断发 展，基于计算机视觉的结构位移监测方法不断涌现， 并在实际工程应用中得到验证。其因远距离、 非接触、高精度、省时省力、多点监测等众多优点越来越受到科研和工程人员的关注。
该方法主要对相机拍摄的被测结构视频进行目标追踪处理以得到测点在图像中的运动轨迹，再通过图像与现实世界的几何关系确定结构的位移信息。相机被架设在 距被测目标较远处的固定点上，消除了接触式位移监测方法需要在结构上安装固定支撑点的需求。另外由于相机视野可以涵盖结构上多个测量区域，因此容易以较低的成本实现多点测量。
本文主要对下肢外骨骼位置监测开展研究，主要研究内容如下：
1. 分析所研究的下肢外骨骼系统的结构及工作特性，明确结构参数和工作运动范围，进而确定工作自由度和运动范围，完成结构本体设计方案。
2. 基于机构连杆几何关系建立外骨骼运动学模型；基于拉格朗日方程建立外骨骼动力学模型；并基于此建立液驱下肢外骨骼系统的整体模型，为运动理论研究提供理论基础。
3. 运用基于机器视觉的多点目标动态位移监测方法对实验设备机械连杆和主要运动点位进行位置和运动监测；通过深度学习训练标定目标的算法；验证本文提出的方法在下肢外骨骼位姿检测和动力特性识别方面的可行性和可靠性。
4.
关键词：下肢外骨骼；数字图像处理；机器视觉；运动监测；动力特性识别


With the advent of an aging society, the number of patients with walking disabilities is increasing, and the demand for medical resources is gradually expanding. Lower limb rehabilitation exoskeletons, as an important auxiliary equipment for rehabilitation medicine, provide a new method for lower limb rehabilitation. Exoskeletons have become an important branch in the field of robotics research, and various forms of exoskeleton posture detection methods have emerged. There is an urgent need for a motion detection system to evaluate the effectiveness of lower limb rehabilitation exoskeleton design.
The continuous improvement of China’s modern industrial system, such as military industry, aerospace, medical care and other materials and equipment working in special environments, has become a popular research direction in the field of mechanical engineering. Real-time monitoring of equipment aims to achieve evaluation and detection of its performance and safety status by analyzing and identifying the normal functionality of the target equipment. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to combine interdisciplinary theories and methods to develop new sensing technologies to provide advanced monitoring methods and reliable data sources for equipment performance evaluation. Precise displacement is an important indicator for state assessment and performance evaluation of modern industrial operations. With the continuous development of computer vision technology and image acquisition equipment, computer vision-based structural displacement monitoring methods have emerged and been verified in practical engineering applications. Its many advantages such as long-distance, non-contact, high-precision, time-saving and labor-saving, multi-point monitoring are attracting more and more attention from scientific researchers and engineers.
This method mainly performs target tracking processing on the video of the measured structure captured by the camera to obtain the motion track of the measuring point in the image, and then determines the displacement information of the structure through the geometric relationship between the image and the real world. The camera is erected on a fixed point far away from the measured object, eliminating the need for fixed support points on the structure required by the contact displacement monitoring method. In addition, since the camera field of view can cover multiple measurement areas on the structure, it is easy to realize multi-point measurement at a lower cost.
This paper mainly studies the position monitoring of lower extremity exoskeleton. The main research contents are as follows:
1.Analyze the structure and working characteristics of the lower extremity exoskeleton system under study, clarify the structural parameters and working range of motion, and then determine the working degree of freedom and range of motion, and complete the structural body design plan.
2.Establish the kinematics model of the exoskeleton based on the geometric relationship of the connecting rods of the mechanism; establish the dynamics model of the exoskeleton based on the Lagrangian equation; and based on this, establish the overall model of the exoskeleton system for the liquid-driven lower limbs, providing a theoretical basis for the study of motion theory.
3.Use the multi-point target dynamic displacement monitoring method based on machine vision to monitor the position and movement of the mechanical linkage and main movement points of the experimental equipment; train the algorithm for calibrating the target through deep learning; verify the method proposed in this paper in the lower extremity exoskeleton position feasibility and reliability of posture detection and dynamic characteristic identification.
4.
Keyword：Electro-hydraulic servo; Lower extremity exoskeleton; Digital image processing; Machine vision; Motion detection; Dynamic characteristics recognition
